briefing thanks Jess good afternoon and
welcome back to Downing Street for
today's Daily coronavirus briefing I'm
joined today by dr. Yvonne Doyle medical
director at public health England and
before I outline the latest on
coronavirus and the work that we're
doing as a government to tackle it I
wanted briefly to update you about the
Prime Minister's condition it's great
news that the Prime Minister has been
discharged from hospital and is now
continuing his recovery at Chequers I
hope everyone has seen his message of
love and thanks to all those who've
supported his recovery and to the NHS
colleagues who've cared for him so
brilliantly at Sun Thomas's Hospital I
know that they have cared for him as
they would care for anybody in this
country and it's one of the things that
makes me so proud that the NHS is there
for us all and can give its very best to
every single person and has been able to
throughout this crisis I know that all
of his thoughts are with those affected
by this illness and of course the
government is working constantly through
our coronavirus action plan and the aim
is to protect life and to protect the
NHS both by slowing the spread of the
virus to flatten the curve and by
ensuring that the NHS is always there
for you and always has more than enough
capacity to meet the demands that are
placed on it today marks a somber day in
the impact of this disease as we join
the list of countries who have seen more
than 10,000 deaths related to
coronavirus the fact that over 10,000
people have now lost their lives to this
invisible killer demonstrates just how
serious coronavirus is and why the
national effort that everyone is engaged
in is so important
according to the most recent figures 282
thousand three hundred and seventy four
people have now been tested for
coronavirus eighty four thousand two
hundred and seventy nine have tested
positive across Great Britain the number
of people admitted to hospital with
coronavirus symptoms is now nineteen
thousand nine hundred and forty five and
of those who've contracted the virus
ten thousand six hundred and twelve have
tragically died our sincere condolences
are with all of them with their families
their friends their grief is our grief
and their stories will not be forgotten
on Friday
I said that staying at home this Easter
weekend would be a major test of the
nation's resolve and I'm pleased to say
that the nation is rising to this
challenge I know that for some people
this has been extra tough if you're at
home with their children if you can't
visit relatives because they're
shielding if you're unable to go to
church on this most important day for
Christians your steadfast commitment to
following the social distancing rules is
making a difference thank you for the
part that you are playing in helping to
protect lives at this critical time in
our nation's history but we cannot be
complacent not when there's so much at
stake so please keep going stay home
protect the NHS and save lives
today I want to provide an update on the
work we're doing to slow the spread of
the virus and to build capacity the
latest figures show that in Great
Britain we have 2,295 spare critical
care beds up a hundred and fifty from
yesterday so throughout this crisis with
all the challenges that we've been
dealing with all the operational
difficulties and all of the logistics we
have always been able to provide the
very best of care
to everybody who needs it through the
NHS at the start of this crisis people
said that the NHS would be overwhelmed
and we've seen that and we've seen the
risk of that elsewhere but not here and
that is because of the action that a
huge number of people have taken the
incredible work of so many there is more
spare capacity now for critical care
than the walls when coronavirus first
hit our shores and this is before the
nightingale hospital's come on stream
London's opened and we're already in the
process of building six more around
England this critical expansion is
partly because we have a record number
of ventilators nine thousand seven
hundred and seventy five and partly
because we have record numbers of
returners coming back and rejoining the
NHS over 5,000 former staff are now back
on the NHS frontline and over 36,000
have come forward to enlist and this
bolstered capacity has been backed by
substantial financial support as the
Chancellor said whatever our NHS and
vital public services need during this
time they will have but of course
there's always more that must be done so
we're increasing the amount of PPE and
I'm glad to say that there are now
record amounts in the system and we need
the right amounts of medicine - and I
can assure everyone that we're working
very closely with the pharmaceutical
supply chain and hospital pharmacies so
that the right medicines are there to
treat people and I'm glad to see the
reassurances that have been provided
today that everybody can have the
medicines they need in order to get the
care that they need and when we debate
the operational challenges we face I
want to be transparent about every
single one let us not forget that the
core measure of NHS capacity which is
what matters to you when one when you or
one of your loved ones
needs it is whether you can get the best
care if you catch coronavirus on that we
are succeeding and in fact succeeding
more with each passing day I also wanted
to provide a brief update on this work
on personal protective equipment which
is so important for NHS as social care
staff I pay tribute to our health and
care staff this weekend just like every
weekend at giving the very best possible
care on Thursday on streets front doors
and balconies up and down the country
we've seen the esteem with which the
whole nation holds our carers that
people who make the NHS and social care
what it is and we owe it to them to get
them the equipment that they need on
Friday we published a comprehensive PPE
plan which is based on everyone using
the right PPE according to the agreed
guidelines and daily we're delivering
millions of items to the frontline now I
know that there have been questions also
about gowns in the last two days one
hundred and twenty one thousand gowns
have been delivered around the country
and more are going out today and in the
week to come so we're working very hard
to resolve all of these individual
logistical challenges it's worth saying
that the average time for dealing with
PPE queries has gone down from six days
in March to an average of two and a half
days over the past week and since we
published the plan last week I'm
delighted that the sheer number of
businesses that have come forward to
help with our PPE effort even over the
bank holiday weekend thank you to all of
you
and to all those who are involved in
this enormous Herculean effort on PPE
and I know that we'll see many more
businesses coming forward and I look
forward to it testing of course has a
huge role in our response and we have
discussed repeatedly testing at these
press conferences and pleased to say
that forty two thousand eight hundred
and twelve NHS and social care staff and
their families have now been tested and
as we ramped up our ability to test in
large numbers we also need to make sure
we have the ability to trace contract
contacts just as effectively and so
today I wanted to outline the next step
a new NHS app for contact tracing
if you become unwell with the symptoms
of coronavirus you can securely tell
this new NHS app and the app will then
send an alert anonymously to other app
users that you've been in significant
contact with over the past few days even
before you had symptoms so that they
know and connect accordingly all data
will be handled according to the highest
ethical and security standards and would
only be used for NHS care and research
and we won't hold it any longer than
it's needed and as part of our
commitment to transparency we'll be
publishing the source code - we're
already testing this app and as we do
this we're working closely with the
world's leading tech companies and
renowned experts in clinical safety and
digital ethics so that we can get this
right I want to thank all of these world
leading experts who've been involved the
more people who get involved then the
better informed our response to
coronavirus will be and the better we
can protect the NHS Her Majesty the
Queen spoke for all of us as she so
often does when she said that Easter is
not canceled and that we need it now
more than ever this is an uncertain
Easter for so many people at a time when
we normally come physically together we
must stay apart it runs counter to every
human instinct and every intuition that
we possess but we must persevere because
if we follow the rules and slow the
spread of the virus then each new day
will bring us closer to normal life and
we can enjoy Easter's to come safe in
the knowledge that when it mattered we
did our bit and rose to the challenge
and we put our loved ones we put our NHS
staff and we put our local communities
first so please this Easter stay home
protect the NHS and save lives I'm now
going to hand over to Yvonne to take us
through the charts and the information
Thank You Secretary of State we have
four charts to show today and the first
one is on the use of transport and on
this slide you can see that all forms of
transport have reduced greatly
particularly
rail and tube but also Motor Vehicles
have declined recently as well thank you
could I have the next slide this slide
tells us about the new UK cases and we
can see here on the 12th of April that
we have had four and a half thousand
cases done through our NHS and public
health England offer of testing and now
coming on stream increasingly is the
drive through and testing of key workers
and the NHS stuff and that is bringing
us in now 838 yesterday and today 838 so
an increasing enhancement of the testing
capacity and then on the next slide we
can see the people if they slide about
people in hospital beds with kovat 19
and here we can see the trend has been
increasing air for London but now we're
beginning to see London stabilizing
dipping rising dipping again so probably
a stay more stable pattern for London
but on the other hand for air Great
Britain we do see other regions now
beginning to increase particularly the
northwest and the Yorkshire area as well
and the Northeast so it is very
important that the message about staying
at home and social distancing is a
tiered - because we are certainly not
past this virus damage yet and then
finally on the final slide we have the
globe of death comparisons and here we
can see where the UK is it's somewhere
in the middle it's tracking France it's
looking close to the Italian trend at
the moment but this is still early days
we would stress in understanding deaths
and we can see where other
trees have higher increases in their
deaths at the moment so those are our
four slides thank you very much thanks
very much indeed Yvonne and if we go to
the BBC we've got David Shipman health
secretary thank you very much indeed
yes if I may ask about on this day that
we've passed this very somber milestone
as you put it ten thousand deaths what
is your reaction to the comments of one
of your own advisers so jeremy farah
renowned international expert on
infectious diseases that the UK may be
on course for the worst outcome in terms
of death toll in europe well I think
that that that sort of comment merely
reinforces the importance of the central
message which is that people should stay
at home because that protects the NHS
and saves lives we get advice from all
sorts of experts and we take it all very
seriously and we assess it and
throughout now the the future of this
virus is unknowable as yet because it
depends on the behavior of millions of
people and the great British public the
good news is that so far we have managed
to start to see a flattening of the
curve because people are following the
social distancing and measures by and
large and also that the core goal of
making sure that NHS capacity is always
above the demand for NHS services has
been achieved and so I think especially
at moments like this when we have
reached this this this terrible marker
and we are thankfully in a position
where we are able to support everybody
who needs it in the NHS and we're able
to see the curve starting to come down
if on I don't know on the international
comparisons of course different
countries are different size so you need
to be make sure you get the statistic
right in that absolutely under could I
say every one of these 10,000 and more
deaths is an absolute tragedy from a
virus we didn't know about some time ago
but when you get down to the statistics
it does depend on how people measure
this there are time lags and the deaths
and it is I would stress it particularly
it is early days because patterns that
we saw perhaps in countries earlier in
this may change and we're beginning to
see that internationally thanks very
much David unless you want to follow up
if I could ask you about PPE the
briefing given yesterday with your
colleague the Home Secretary yeah I
asked whether it was possible for her on
behalf of the government to give a
commitment to a date by when deliveries
of PPE would match what's needed on the
front line because every day we get
messages from health care workers and
others saying they simply don't have
what's needed yeah well I the the answer
is that it's impossible because the
quest is to get a the right PPE to the
right people on the front line at the
right time across many millions of
people across the NHS and Social Care
and I'm glad to say that that effort is
moving in the right direction
we now have records amounts of PPE
that's print been put out into the
system but until everybody gets the PPE
that they need then we won't rest and we
have we have thousands of people working
24/7 on this including over this bank
holiday weekend because the need and the
demand for PPE doesn't stop either so
it's an enormous effort and I want to
actually go out of my way to thank the
procurement experts that we've got in
the system they don't often get thanks
the procurement experts because they're
not on the frontline but by god do we
need them to make sure that we can get
all that PPE and as I mentioned with
gowns which is the
currently the item that's most in need
that we've been making some progress
over the over the weekend with more to
come next week thanks David I've got
Martha Farley from ITV thank you health
secretary a question to you if I may the
Royal College of Nursing has issued new
guidance to its members telling them
that if they haven't been given the
appropriate PPE and that there's no
other way of treating a patient without
reducing risk then they should refuse to
work rather than compromising their own
safety will you apologize to the nurses
and indeed the other medical and health
care workers who are being put in that
impossible position of having to make a
decision between whether to offer
treatment to a patient or to protect
their own personal safety well Martha as
I said in the previous answer we're
working night and day to make sure that
we get the right PPE and actually the
thing I want to do is pay tribute to the
unbelievable efforts of a huge number of
people to get to the position where we
are in now which as I said in my opening
remarks is improving but we won't rest
until we get there so I work closely
with the Royal College of Nursing on
these matters on other things in fact I
was in contact with them only earlier
today because it's so important that we
get this right Nick Martin from Sky
brain good afternoon a question first to
Secretary of State and then Vaughn Doyle
if I'm a secretary of state you Paynter
relatively you posted a picture of where
we are within our moments but there is a
very different picture being painted
within our care and nursing homes
I spent a full day in a nursing home the
other day in which a full floor had been
devoted to elderly patients suffering
from coronavirus and I witnessed flimsy
PP overstretched that a lot of illness
and unfortunately some
death of some of the residents and
what's been coming back from what I
witnessed from the care sector is that
they are crying out for tests homeowners
have been telling me that they're not
getting regular tests for staff and
residents but crucially for those being
transferred from hospitals to the care
sector and that they are operating in
the dark and I tell you if my inbox is
anything to go by today the care sector
is watching this right now and is
desperate for you to tell them that they
will get regular tests so they can end
this lottery can you give that guarantee
to them yes I can
Nick that is coming and last week we
were able to open up testing to the to
staff in care homes and throughout this
there's been the availability of testing
on a clinical basis within care homes as
you mentioned and and this is an area of
incredibly high importance because
precisely as you've seen some of the
most vulnerable people live in care
homes and especially in nursing homes
and therefore getting this right is is
just so important so I think one of the
things that we've succeeded in doing as
a as a country during this crisis is
recognizing that our care staff are on
the frontline just as much as our NHS
staff are and making sure that we expand
that testing capability both to staff
and to residents including this very
difficult issue of patients leaving
hospital we we are addressing that and I
think that the issues that you raise are
incredibly important thank you and John
Stevens from the male yes of course John
if you don't mind we'll go back to Nick
go ahead hair or brains are telling me
that they need this now yes or tomorrow
what's the time scale that you can
arrange for regular widespread tests to
get into care homes how long will they
have to wait for these tests yes so on
for the staff as I said we have made
that change already at the end of
week and I announced it on Friday and
therefore we weave we're rolling that
out right now and for the residents that
change that they the testings been
available throughout but we also we
always constantly keep under review the
protocols for the transfer of people
between hospitals and Social Care which
is a very nuanced and complicated area
where the most important thing is that
the interests of the patient are put
first Yvonne did you want to add
anything on that you've heard a question
Nick now right are you satisfied that
care homes have enough support
well I'm constantly trying to get more
support to them is the honest truth and
of course making sure for instance that
the testing is available I was very glad
that we were able to roll that out to
testing staff and you'll have seen the
sharp increase in the number of tests
that are available I think you might
have heard a question but let me say
this is very much on our radar as well
we're very aware through our local
health protection teams and our
connections with our local directors of
Public Health and through the local
resilience for about the care homes we
profile them now in a way that perhaps
was never done before and this is very
valuable for us going forward as a
country that we have a truly integrated
approach to care and yes
testing does occur in the nursing homes
but we have more to do nursing and care
homes we understand there is much more
to do here to get to every last quarter
where there is anxiety where the most
vulnerable are and our guidance has
guidance has taken account of this to
simplify what people actually need at
the frontline in that sector yeah
anything morning no thank you very much
okay John Stephens at the mail do you
updated figures on the number of NHS
workers who have died after getting
coronavirus and what are you doing to
establish the reasons why yes this is a
really important question and I don't
have an update on the figure of 19 NHS
staff who've died that I gave
yesterday but what I can tell you is
that we are looking into each
circumstance to understand the as much
as is possible
and how they caught the virus whether
that was at work outside of work and the
clinical setting that they've been that
they were working in and making sure
that we learn as much as we possibly can
and therefore of course protect our
health workers as much as possible
Yvonne Thank You Secretary of State this
is of great importance scientifically as
well that we understand why infections
occur in hospitals across healthcare
staff and what the avoidable factors in
that might be and that is something that
is under investigation at the moment I
mean I would say John that you know the
people who go into the NHS as the Prime
Minister so movingly said in his words
in the video that he recorded this
morning that I hope you've seen the you
know the the admiration for those who
put themselves in harm's way is
incredibly high you know they they
they're unbelievable and therefore it's
of course incumbent on us to make sure
that we get to the bottom of each and
individual case and learn everything we
can so that we can better protect people
in the future and so that we can give a
full account to the family and loved
ones of each member of the NHS family
who's died yes of course yeah well um
the Prime Minister if you know if he's
been given advice and how long he should
rest before he returns to work he's he
is resting he's at Chequers I'm
delighted that he's out of hospital and
has recovered and but there isn't any
advice on how long that'll be a clinical
decision for his doctors to take with
him the government is operating
perfectly efficiently within the
strategy that he set out
Nicola Bartlett from the mirror
and Secretary of State's you've talked
about a reduction in the time that it's
taken to get PPE to to those places that
need it down to two and a half days I
wanted to ask you if that is an
acceptable time during which the NHS
staff that you've just praised will be
putting themselves in harm's way while
treating patients thanks for the
question that's it's that just to be
fear and the two and a half days is the
time taken to fulfill a query so we have
a 24/7 hotline for all of the 58,000
locations that we now need to get PPE to
and that they can call when they've got
a need and the two and a half days is
not necessarily or particularly a time
that to wait for PPE
without any because many of the times
that people call that hotline they call
saying we've got a we'll run out by the
end of the week for instance the more
urgent cases where they wear the
shortage is more acute we act on
immediately so the two and a half days
is an average and so it shouldn't be
interpreted that people are waiting for
two and a half days that's not the
measure the reason the measure is
important is because it's a it's the way
of tracking how quickly we're able to go
from somebody raising an alarm on that
on that phone number which is there so
that they so that anybody in the system
in an organization that receives
protective equipment from us can then
get the protective equipment and it's a
measure of how fast the system can
respond and the challenge of getting
protective equipment to every single
person is very complicated and so you
have to have measures of how we're
progressing against that because my
ultimate goal make sure everybody has it
at every moment that they need and is is
one that I won't we are driving hard at
but we've got to be able to measure the
progress on the way and just on that
point and mr. Hancock we've known about
the dangers of this virus foot for many
months now
and that it was likely that the UK would
have to respond to this challenge were
we too late in putting in the orders and
putting some of these measures in place
to get that vital equipment to people
because other countries have managed to
protect their staff in a way that we
don't seem to have been able to do well
I think that's I don't I don't quite
agree with that and firstly when I talk
to my colleagues across the world we
share this challenge and and the reason
is that it isn't it is that we have the
stockpiles we went into this with the
stockpiles and the challenge is a
logistical one of having previously had
an organization that serves just over
200 NHS organisations the demand for pH
in the need for it has gone up enormous
ly and there's now 58 thousand
organizations that the this huge
logistical operation services and so
it's been a challenge of logistics as
much as one of supply and that's what
the people you planned that I set out on
Friday goes into detail of to explain
the the challenges in that distribution
but also we at the same time of course
have got to replenish the stockpiles
that we went into this with so we did
actually go in with some some quite
significant stockpiles but of course
given the sheer quantities that we're
distributing across the system we're
using those stockpiles up and we need to
replenish them as well Raj Singh from
the HuffPost good afternoon the chief
scientific advisors Sir Patrick valance
was happy to go on record last month to
say the 20,000 deaths or fewer would be
in his words a good outcome for the UK
given that we've now hit 10,000 can we
still achieve that good outcome well
that's a the best way I'm going to ask
if on to come in on this but I think the
thing that I'd say the best way to
respond to the question is to say that
the future path of this pandemic in this
country is determined by how people act
and that's why it's so important that
people follow the social distancing
guidelines and I know that we sometimes
you know that we repeat this message but
we repeat it for a reason because it's
so important you know the twin goals of
having the social distancing guidelines
followed so that we reduce the spread of
the virus and at the same time making
sure that the NHS capacity is always
there to treat people these are the most
important measures that we've got and
for you know discussion about PPE is
important and discussion about and gowns
and medicine shortages all of these
things are important but the capacity of
the NHS to treat every single person and
the behavior of everyone in this country
to do their bit to flatten the curve are
are the most important things that we
can possibly be doing and it and so
predictions are not possible precisely
because they depend on the behavior of
the British people and I'm really glad
that at the moment the British people
this weekend are doing that bit
Thank You Secretary of State I would
absolutely agree with this because just
as we're learning about the virus and
its behavior we're learning about deaths
and why deaths are occurring in the way
that they are and can we actually do
anything more than we're doing and at
the moment at this stage of this
epidemic by far the most important thing
to do is exactly what we're doing which
is social distancing breaking the chain
of transmission and shielding the most
vulnerable which is an absolutely
crucial element of this and we are
watching that day-by-day sometimes many
times a day including what is happening
with deaths so that's what we need to do
for some time to come
thanks very much charge little Jill
lawless from the AAP thank you very much
mr. Hancock you and the Prime Minister
today both been paying tribute to people
who work in the NHS and you've both some
highlighted in particular at those who
come from overseas I mean do you think
that when this crisis is over the
government should be asking itself
whether it has the right policies both
in terms of fun
and organizing the NHS and also in terms
of immigration because we've seen an
awful lot of people who work in health
care and social care and do vital jobs
have been cast classed as low skilled
workers and told they're not a priority
well I'm not sure about that and firstly
we brought in the NHS visa precisely to
be able to attract people from around
the world to work in the NHS and I'm
incredibly proud of people who come to
this country to work in the NHS and
you're right yesterday I did I
highlighted the fact that tragically a
disproportionate number of those in the
NHS who've died are people who came to
make their lives here and to work in the
NHS and have given their lives working
in the NHS and I pay tribute to them and
I want to acknowledge that but I would
say that in terms of immigration policy
the NHS visa is precisely a reflection
of our respect for and an admiration of
those who've come from overseas to work
in the NHS and on the support foreign
funding of the NHS I'm also delighted
that we went into this crisis with
record numbers of people and record
funding in the NHS but there's no doubt
that afterwards of course everybody's
going to ask all sorts of questions and
we'll reflect on that but I think that
it's fair to say that my admiration for
those who work in the NHS whether they
from come from overseas or whether they
were were born here
it doesn't matter my admiration for them
is is it is unparalleled and I think
that at this moment the fact that there
it's so obvious to them that the nation
really values their work from the prime
minister down if you saw his message I
think that is the most important message
we can give them as they take the brave
steps as they do each day of going into
work to tackle the virus thanks very
much indeed that concludes today's
Downing Street briefing
will no doubt see you all again tomorrow
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC dog code at UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News